# Dropping out

I dropped out of my 16-18 education which in the UK in 2011-2013 was called A Levels and involved four specialist subjects which were reduced to three in the second year. I was already ‘dropping out’ in year previous to this, scraping by in my GCSEs mostly on common sense and a bit of rush preparation.

I did not drop out for particularly noble reasons. My school was a poor quality one and getting worse, with random violence a feature of most days and classrooms often barely functioning. Where discipline was obtained the lessons were mind-numbingly boring. I had been ahead of my classmates in most subjects for a number of years but the willingness and ability of teachers to provide additional work for me had dwindled, largely due to the flight of good teachers from the school as standards dropped.

I suppose I could have put my head down and got on with things as many of my peers did. For whatever reason I found this disagreeable, and instead chose to explore life outside of school. I had wonderful experiences with friends and love and adventures on my own cycling through woodlands near where I grew up. I explored my home city of London and took a notebook everywhere, writing and thinking and planning.

I found paid employment in December 2012 having turned 18 a couple of months before. Originally meant to be a Christmas job and then just part-time, it quickly expanded to become a full-time endeavour. When my mother was unemployed, welfare payments amounted to around £80 a week to support us both on. The salary of around £300 a week I found myself earning ensured I never stepped foot in school again, save once to print some documents and again to meet with the headteacher and explain what I had done.

I took A Level examinations in 2013, roundly failed them (to the extent I attended them at all) and carried on with my life. I took them again in 2014 to get enough accreditation to start a university degree. Yes, despite - or rather because of - my experience with school, university was a priority. I chose Birkbeck College, University of London because it was friendly to people like me who didn't look good on paper. I did try Goldsmiths College (where my heart pulled me because I thought it was trendy and a favourite musician of mine went there) and they hung up on me when I explained my situation. When I called Birkbeck College, I spoke to [Professor Tim Smith](https://www.bbk.ac.uk/our-staff/profile/8004116/tim-smith) and talked about my interests in computational models. He seemed happy with me and gave me a chance.

## So should I drop out?

My experience is a narrow one. There is a thing called the [Thiel Fellowship](https://thielfellowship.org) which pays young people to drop out. And of course, I grew up in the era when such examples seemed to be everywhere after Mark Zuckerberg flew out of the gates of Havard with Facebook.

I am profoundly suspicious of the educational system at all levels, particularly when it interacts with people of lower socioeconomic status. The game of incentives at play in pushing teenagers to apply to certain universities and certain subjects in order to boost rankings for a school is rational, but should be recognised for how little it serves the interest of the vulnerable young person it involves.

A turn of phrase that sticks with me from an article in the Financial Times I can no longer find is that universities are increasingly constituted as “hedge funds with a passing interesting in students” (or words to that effect). This has much merit when considering university accounts. I do not think the university system is any longer a good way of educating young people and I think it does not offer many good opportunites for people hoping to do good work at a research level. The gap between industry work and research work has become extremely narrow in many scientific fields, and university laboratories increasingly serve as contractors for pharmaceutical giants by way of grant funding determining their projects. This is not necessarily a bad thing - corporate science can be powerfully effective - but it is good to note to avoid any romanticism about the pure intellectual thrill of the academy.

I harbour some regret on occasion that I did not choose a more useless path in academic life, developing scholarship on some obscure poet from centuries ago which few would ever read. I would spend long hours in the library and construct a labyrinth of theory. I would delight in telling any who would listen all about my topic, instead of finding myself forever participating in a discourse already occupied by a thousand other names. But I have never really regretted persisting in academic life, whatever the challenges and disappointments it has brought on. I do not think I am particularly good at being a graduate student but I don't mind that so much, since I have had the most wonderful time to think and grow. It has felt like a reward most of the time. I see people nearly a decade younger than me now starting companies to build the future and I do not feel much envy, certainly not in a way that eats at me. I have stayed in academic life as long as it made sense and I will probably leave in some not too far future, and I go as freely as I came, with a sense that the next thing is not necessarily a sensible thing to do given my background, is not particularly efficient, nor very likely to be easy, but it fills me with extraordinary joy at the opportunity to even try. And that is how I have made all of my decisions since I first dropped out a decade ago.
